# Basic JavaScript-rendered Hello World

## 📝 Your Notes

- The DOM is an API that breaks an HTML page into nodes and objects. Which can
  they be manipulated by scripting languages.

- The objects have methods and properties built into them that are used to do
  the event driven programming that is manipulating the page.

- The core DOM defines the structure and objects within it, which multiple API's
  can then plug into this core DOM. The DOM is not javascript. It isn't a
  language either, but is needed to define the context for JS to than build
  scirpts to manipulate. So its a map which JS is very familiar with.

- You can access the dom by using a "script" element and then calling on the
  .window or .body objects.

- These are common interfaces to use in DOM

  - document.querySelector(selector)
  - document.querySelectorAll(name)
  - document.createElement(name)
  - parentNode.appendChild(node)
  - element.innerHTML
  - element.style.left
  - element.setAttribute()
  - element.getAttribute()
  - element.addEventListener()
  - window.content
  - Window.onload
  - window.scrollTo()

- when creating the element names, good practice to call `xElement`

- The script tag is within the body.

- Scripts without `async`, `defer` or `type="module"` attributes, as well as
  inline scripts without the`type="module"` attribute, are fetched and executed
  immediately, before the browser continues to parse the page.

- inline script `<script> alert("Hello World!"); </script>`
- import script`<script src="javascript.js"></script>`

- When importing a script, you must use either a use relative or absolute path.
  But, if you import many, you can use an `importMap` and define the paths in
  this JSON object. In the import statements, you then reference the alias used
  in the import map.

- The map must be defined before any script elements and there can only be one!

- Appending. We can use `.append()` or `.appendChild()`. There are a few
  differences:
  - `.appendChild()` can only append one object at a time, `.append()` can do
    multiple.
  - `.append()` can append strings and objects, `.appendChild()` can only append
    objects.

## Background

It doesn't take long to learn how to make "Hello World" appear on the page with
HTML:

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div>Hello World</div>
  </body>
</html>
```

The browser takes this HTML code and generates
[the DOM (the Document Object Model)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction)
out of it. The browser then exposes the DOM to JavaScript so you can interact
with it to add a layer of interactivity to your web-page.

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div id="root">Hello World</div>
    <script type="module"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

Years ago, people were generating HTML on the server and then adding JavaScript
on top of that generated HTML for interactivity. However, as requirements for
that interactivity became more challenging, this approach produced applications
that were difficult to maintain and had performance issues.

So modern JavaScript frameworks were created to address some of the challenges
by programmatically creating the DOM rather than defining it in hand-written
HTML.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/01.html)
- [Final](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.html)

It's important to have a basic understanding of how to generate and interact
with DOM nodes using JavaScript because it will help you understand how React
works under the hood a little better. So in this exercise we're actually not
going to use React at all. Instead we're going to use JavaScript to create a
`div` DOM node with the text "Hello World" and insert that DOM node into the
document.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 generate the root node

[Production deploy](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-1.html)

Rather than having the `root` node in the HTML, see if you can create that one
using JavaScript as well.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Fundamentals%20%E2%9A%9B&e=01%3A%20Basic%20JavaScript-rendered%20Hello%20World&em=).
